1

Marshel, Garrett, Nauhaus & Callaway

Neuron, Volume 72
Supplemental Information

Functional Specialization
of Seven Mouse Visual Cortical Areas
James H. Marshel, Marina E. Garrett, Ian Nauhaus, and Edward M.
Callaway

Supplemental Information
I. Supplemental Data

Table S1, related to Table 1. Further tabulation of numbers of neurons sampled by cortical
area. Total neurons indicates number (N) of neurons recorded in the spatial frequency (SF) and
temporal frequency (TF) experiments for each area. Number (N) and percent of total of
responsive (∆F/F > 6%) and reliable neurons (δ > 1, Experimental Procedures) for each area.
Neurons which were responsive and reliable, as well as representing eccentricities within 50° of
the center of space (over 99% of responsive and reliable neurons) were included in subsequent
population analyses. ―N Expts‖ refers to the number of fields of view (samples of neurons)
recorded from for each area. This table (compared to Table 1) separates responsive from reliable
criteria, and shows number of neurons passing eccentricity criteria for inclusion in our analysis.

2

Marshel, Garrett, Nauhaus & Callaway

Figure S1, Related to Figure 1. Spherical coordinates transformed to a flat surface. A
mathematical transformation (Supplemental Experimental Procedures) was applied to all stimuli
so that they were displayed in spherical coordinates on a flat monitor (tangent to the
hemisphere). (A) Altitude coordinates. Colors represent isoaltitude lines. This transformation
was applied to drifting sine wave grating stimuli in order to keep spatial and temporal
frequencies constant throughout the hemifield. It was also applied to vertical retinotopy stimuli
(Movie S1). (B) Azimuth coordinates. Colors represent isoazimuth lines. This transformation
was applied to horizontal retinotopy stimuli (Movie S2). The combination of altitude and
azimuth-corrected retinotopy stimuli mapped retinotopic eccentricity in spherical coordinates
using a flat monitor.

3

Figure S2

Marshel, Garrett, Nauhaus & Callaway

4

Marshel, Garrett, Nauhaus & Callaway

Figure S2, related to Figure 2. High-resolution retinotopic maps measured with low
magnification two-photon calcium imaging reveal structural details of small visual areas.
Fine-scale retinotopic organization of mouse visual cortex (A-H). Colors represent retinotopic
eccentricity, as in Figure 2. Panels A & E show continuous vertical retinotopy maps, in altitude
coordinates. Positive values indicate the upper field and negative values the lower field. Panels B
& F show the corresponding contour plots of vertical eccentricity with area borders outlined in
black. Panels C & G show continuous horizontal retinotopy maps, in azimuth coordinates, with
positive values representing the nasal visual field and negative values representing the temporal
visual field. Panels D & H show contour plots of horizontal retinotopy, overlaid with area
borders. Area borders correspond to area diagram in Figure 1I. (A-D) Retinotopic organization
of posterior-lateral extrastriate areas. The retinotopic structures of areas P and POR, often
difficult to resolve using intrinsic imaging, are revealed by mapping with calcium imaging.
Areas shown in (B, D) correspond to V1, AL, LI, POR, and P surrounding area LM
counterclockwise.. The border between V1 and LM and AL is marked by a reversal at the
vertical meridian (blue-purple, (C, D)). LM and LI are separated by a reversal at the temporal
periphery (yellow-green, (C,D)). AL is separated from LM by a reversal near the horizontal
meridian (purple-blue (A, B)). A reversal in horizontal retinotopy separates both P and POR
from areas LM and LI (yellow-red, (C,D)). The border between P and POR occurs at the
representation of the upper periphery (purple (A, B)). (E-H) Retinotopic organization of anterior
extrastriate areas, located in the posterior parietal cortex. Areas shown in (F, H) include LM, AL,
RL, A, AM, PM, V1 (starting at lower left, moving clockwise). The retinotopic structure of all
areas is consistent with maps displayed in Figure 2. Fine-scale features resolved by calcium
imaging include a ring like structure in the representation of the vertical meridian in area RL
(purple, (G, H)), as well as an organized representation of the visual field in both the horizontal
and vertical dimension for areas AM and PM (right, (F, H)). Here, visual activation is observed
in the expected location of area A, however, a clear retinotopic structure is not apparent. This
area receives less-organized (less topographic) input from V1 than the other areas (Wang and
Burkhalter 2007). All scale bars 500 µm.

5

Figure S3

Marshel, Garrett, Nauhaus & Callaway

6

Marshel, Garrett, Nauhaus & Callaway

Figure S3, related to Figure 3. Responses are robust and selective across visual areas.
Calcium responses and tuning curves for example cells from each visual area. Response matrices
(upper plots) show the change in fluorescence over baseline for each stimulus condition, for the
spatial frequency (SF) experiment (top of each panel) and temporal frequency (TF) experiment
(middle of each panel). The average response across all trials of a given condition is shown in
black, with the responses to each trial in gray. Gray boxes indicate the duration of the stimulus, 2
seconds for SF experiments, 4 seconds for TF experiments. Scale bars to lower right of matrices
correspond to 40% F/F. Tuning curves (bottom of each panel) were generated by taking the
average F/F for each stimulus condition, at the intersection of the matrix that gave the peak
response. Orientation tuning curves (yellow boxes) are taken across all orientations at the
preferred spatial frequency, spatial frequency tuning curves (orange boxes) are taken across all
spatial frequencies at the preferred orientation, and temporal frequency tuning curves (magenta
boxes) are taken across all temporal frequencies at the preferred orientation. Values for preferred
stimuli and selectivity metrics are listed above each tuning curve. OSI = orientation selectivity
index, DSI = direction selectivity index, LC = low cutoff frequency, HC = high cutoff frequency,
BW = bandwidth. (A) Example cell from V1. This cell is highly orientation selective, is
bandpass for spatial frequency and lowpass for temporal frequency, preferring the lowest TF
tested (0.5 Hz). (B) Example cell from LM. This cell is perfectly orientation selective (OSI = 1),
bandpass for spatial frequency with broad tuning (BW = 3.5 octaves), and highpass for temporal
frequency, preferring the highest temporal frequency tested (8 Hz). (C) Example cell from LI.
This cell is broadly tuned for orientation, responding similarly to all orientations across all
stimulus conditions (OSI = 0.18) and prefers high spatial frequencies (highpass, pref. SF = 0.16
cpd), and low temporal frequencies (1 Hz). (D) Example cell from AL. This cell is highly
orientation selective, bandpass for spatial frequency with moderately sharp tuning (BW = 2.3
octaves) and broadly tuned for temporal frequency (BW= 3.5 octaves). (E) Example cell from
RL. This cell is highly selective for direction, responding primarily to only one direction of
motion for the same orientation (DSI = 0.65), and is highly selective for spatial frequency, with a
bandwidth of 1.5 octaves. (F) Example cell from AM. This cell is orientation selective, has
moderate spatial frequency selectivity (pref. SF = 0.4cpd, BW = 2 octaves), and responds
similarly to all temporal frequencies.

(G) Example cell from PM. This cell is orientation

selective, is highpass for spatial frequency, and responds weakly across temporal frequencies.

7

Marshel, Garrett, Nauhaus & Callaway

Figure S4, related to Figure 4. Mean temporal frequency bandwidth across visual areas.
Mean temporal frequency bandwidth (in octaves) is higher in several extrastriate areas (LM, AL,
RL) compared to V1, indicating that neurons in these areas respond to a broader range of
temporal frequencies on average. Inset, statistical significance (p < 0.05) of pair-wise
comparisons between areas, corrected for multiple comparisons by the Tukey-Kramer method.
Error bars are standard error of the mean (S.E.M.).

Figure S5, related to Figure 5. Mean spatial frequency bandwidth across visual areas. Mean
spatial frequency bandwidth (in octaves) is sharper in all extrastriate areas except LI, indicating
that higher visual areas are more selective for spatial frequency than V1. Further, some
extrastriate areas (AL, RL, AM) have significantly sharper bandwidth values than LM. Inset,
statistical significance (p < 0.05) of pair-wise comparisons between areas, corrected for multiple
comparisons by the Tukey-Kramer method. Error bars are standard error of the mean (S.E.M.).

8

Figure S6

Marshel, Garrett, Nauhaus & Callaway

9

Marshel, Garrett, Nauhaus & Callaway

Figure S6, related to Figure 7. Correlation analyses between each pair of metrics on a cellby-cell basis for each area. Scatter plots of neuron scores for each combination of selectivity
metrics for each area. Area names at top of figure correspond to the entire column of scatter
plots. Pearson‘s correlation coefficients (R) are listed above each plot for each area, along with
the p value corresponding to a significance test against zero correlation (α < 5% for p < 0.007
after accounting for multiple comparisons with the Bonferroni method). (A) The preferred spatial
frequency of each neuron is plotted as a function of preferred temporal frequency of each neuron
for each area. Note: not all neurons in our dataset received scores for both spatial and temporal
frequencies (e.g., we did not record from them in both experiments), thus the populations in the
plots in (A) are a subset of the populations used in other analyses of SF and TF experiments
alone. (B) The orientation selectivity index (OSI) of each neuron is plotted as a function of
direction selectivity index (DSI) of each neuron for each area. (C) Preferred temporal frequency
of each neuron is plotted as a function of OSI of each neuron for each area. (D) Preferred
temporal frequency of each neuron plotted as a function of DSI of each neuron for each area. (E)
Preferred spatial frequency of each neuron plotted as a function of OSI of each neuron for each
area. (F) Preferred spatial frequency of each neuron as a function of DSI of each neuron for each
area.

Movie S1, related to Figure 1. Vertical retinotopy visual stimulus. To map vertical
retinotopy, a single bar was drifted across the full upper-lower extent of the visual hemifield
while intrinsic signals or calcium transients were measured from the brain. An altitude spherical
correction was applied to accurately project spherical coordinates onto a flat monitor. This gives
the impression of a bar that is curved on the flat screen, but when observed at the appropriate
distance, and with infinite focus (as in the mouse preparation) the bar defines altitude lines on a
sphere. See Supplemental Experimental Procedures for details on stimulus parameters.
Movie S2, related to Figure 1. Horizontal retinotopy visual stimulus. To map horizontal
retinotopy, a single bar was drifted across the full nasal-temporal extent of the visual hemifield
while intrinsic signals or calcium transients were measured from the brain. An azimuth spherical
correction was applied to accurately project spherical coordinates onto a flat monitor. This gives
the impression of a bar that modulates in width on the flat screen, but when observed at the

10

Marshel, Garrett, Nauhaus & Callaway

appropriate distance, and with infinite focus (as in the mouse preparation) the bar defines
azimuth lines on a sphere. See Supplemental Experimental Procedures for details on stimulus
parameters.

II. Supplemental Experimental Procedures
Animal Preparation and Surgery
All experiments involving living animals were approved by the Salk Institute‘s Institutional
Animal Care and Use Committee. All experiments were performed using C57BL/6 mice (n =
28) between 2 and 3 months of age. Surgical plane anesthesia was induced and maintained with
isoflurane (2-2.5% induction, 1-1.25% surgery). Dexamethasone and carprofen were
administered subcutaneously (2 mg/kg and 5 mg/kg respectively). Ibuprofen (30 mg/kg) was
administered post-operatively in the drinking water if the animal recovered overnight after
implanting the recording chamber. A custom-made metal chamber was mounted to the skull,
centered on the visual cortex of the left hemisphere using stereotaxic coordinates. The frame
was mounted so that it was as close to the skull as possible, tilted to be tangent to the brain
surface. The angle of tilt was recorded using a digital protractor by measuring the tilt of the
stereotaxic frame (Narishige) used to parallelize the frame relative to the table. The skull
overlying visual cortex was carefully thinned with a dental drill, stopping often and rinsing with
chilled artificial cerebral spinal fluid (ACSF, in mM: 125 NaCl, 10 d-glucose, 10 HEPES, 3.1
CaCl2, 1.3 MgCl2; or 150 NaCl, 2.5 KCl, 10 HEPES, 2 CaCl2, 1 MgCl2). Great care was taken
to prevent overheating of the brain or subdural bleeding. The bone was thinned just past the
spongy middle layer which often contained blood vessels. The resultant preparation was a thin
layer of semi-flexible bone that was sufficiently transparent to reveal the brain‘s surface
vasculature. This was especially relevant for alignment of cortical blood vessel landmarks with
functional retinotopic maps. For calcium imaging experiments, a craniotomy was made to reveal
the cortex for calcium indicator dye loading and subsequent two-photon imaging. After the
surgery, chlorprothixene (2.5 mg/kg) was administered intramuscularly to the quadriceps and
isoflurane was reduced to 0.25-0.8%, for visual stimulation and recording experiments. The

11

Marshel, Garrett, Nauhaus & Callaway

most robust visual responses coincided with higher respiration rates when the animal appeared to
be lightly anesthetized.

Intrinsic Signal Optical Imaging
The intrinsic signal imaging protocol was adapted from previous studies (Kalatsky and Stryker,
2003; Nauhaus and Ringach, 2007). Imaging setup is as described in Nauhaus and Ringach,
2007. All other relevant modifications are described elsewhere in the text.

Dye Loading and Two-Photon Imaging
The retinotopic map from the intrinsic signal imaging experiment aligned and overlayed with the
image of the cortical blood vessels from the same animal was used as a reference for targeting
the locations of calcium-sensitive dye loading. The dye solution contained 1mM Oregon Green
Bapta-1 AM (OGB, Invitrogen) with 10% DMSO and Pluronic F-127 in ACSF (Stosiek et al.,
2003; Ohki et al., 2005). The solution also included 50 µM sulforhodamine-101 to selectively
label astrocytes (Nimmerjahn et al., 2004). The pipette (3-5 µm outer diameter tip) was lowered
diagonally (30° from horizontal) to 225 µm below the dura surface (layer 2/3) while short pulses
of pressure were applied to the back of the pipette to keep the tip clear of debris. Then, a single
pulse of 1 min duration and 10 PSI was applied for the loading protocol. This typically resulted
in approximately 0.5-1 mm2 of OGB loading. The loading was observed under epifluorescence
to confirm sufficient dye injection. In most cases, several locations were injected in the same
animal often using the same pipette multiple times, resulting in an area of OGB loading spanning
up to several millimeters. Each loading site was separated by approximately 0.5-1mm. At least
one hour after the last loading the two-photon imaging began.
A custom-built Movable Objective Microscope (Sutter) coupled to a Chameleon Ultra II
mode-locked Ti:Sapphire laser (Coherent) was used for two-photon imaging. Standard
wavelength for two-photon microscopy was 920-950 nm. A waveplate (Newport) was used in
conjunction with a beamsplitter cube (Newport) to modulate the power of the excitation laser
light. A 16X water-immersion objective (Nikon) was used for low magnification retinotopy
experiments, and a 40X water-immersion objective (Olympus) was used to measure cellular
responses. Fluorescent light was detected by photomultiplier tubes (Hamamatsu), after being
filtered by one of two emission filter sets: HQ535/50, and HQ610/75 (Chroma).

A third

12

Marshel, Garrett, Nauhaus & Callaway

acquisition channel was used to record the output of a photodiode to detect a brief pulse of light
at the corner of the screen, which precisely indicated the phase of the periodic visual stimulus
(e.g., drifting bar retinotopy stimulus), in addition to the stimulus beginning and end. ScanImage
software (Pologruto et al., 2003) was used for image acquisition. Images and time lapse videos
were processed offline in Matlab (MathWorks) and ImageJ (http://rsbweb.nih.gov/ij/). Imaging
experiments were performed at ~130-180 µm below the dura surface (layer 2/3). For retinotopy
experiments, images were typically acquired at approximately 2 Hz (256 x 256 pixel frames,
unidirectional scanning, ~800 x 800 µm field of view for low magnification imaging with the
16X objective). For recording cellular responses, images were typically acquired at
approximately 8 Hz (256 x 256 pixel frames, bidirectional scanning, either ~150 x 150 µm or
~300 x 300 µm field of view with the 40X objective). The 40X objective provided theoretically
higher resolution than the 16X objective despite having identical numerical aperture (0.8 N.A.).
This was because the 16X back aperture was under filled by the beam size possible on the
microscope, reducing the effective N.A., whereas the 40X back aperture was over filled. For this
reason, we used the 40X for cellular imaging experiments to obtain higher resolution. It should
be noted that cellular responses were detected in our setup with the 16X objective, albeit with
theoretically somewhat lower resolution. Different optics may make it possible to use the 16X
alone for experiments of this nature. After each experiment in a given location, a stack of images
(5 µm z step) was taken starting at the experiment image plane and ending above the dura in
order to determine the precise depth of the experiment offline. Images were taken of the
overlying surface blood vessel pattern in order to register images taken during experiments with
the 40X objective with those with the 16X objective, and with the intrinsic imaging experiments.
High-resolution images (1024 x 1024 pixel frames) were often taken of the experiment imaging
plane as an anatomical reference of the cells recorded.

Visual Stimulation
Drifting bar and drifting grating stimuli were displayed on a gamma-corrected, large
LCD display (68 x 121 cm, 120 Hz monitor, stimulus presented at 60Hz), rotated in ‗portrait‘
mode such that the monitor was taller than it was wide, with the stimulus subtending 153 degrees
of visual space along the vertical axis and 147 degrees along the horizontal axis. This results in a
stimulus that is larger than the extent of the entire known visual hemifield of the mouse, which is

13

Marshel, Garrett, Nauhaus & Callaway

estimated to be at most 110 degrees vertical, 140 degrees horizontal (Wagor et al., 1980). The
perpendicular bisector of the eye was defined as the origin of the line perpendicular to the screen
that intersected with the center of the mouse‘s eye. This point defined 0° altitude and 0° azimuth
of the stimulus.
The screen was placed at an angle of 20° relative to the animal around its dorsoventral
axis such that the screen was pointed slightly inward toward the animal‘s nose. Since the eyes of
the mouse point slightly inward towards the nose, this positioning ensures that the stimulus is
approximately parallel to the retina, and properly stimulates the vertical meridian. The screen
was also tilted to match the tilt of the animal relative to its normal position around its
anteroposterior axis resulting from the angled placement of the recording chamber. For example,
if the recording chamber was angled 20° from the normal horizontal plane of the mouse (as was
necessary to access far lateral extrastriate areas), resulting in a corresponding tilt of the head
when the chamber was held horizontal in the frame, the screen was also tilted 20° to ensure that
the stimulus was parallel to the retina. Thus, in this configuration 0° altitude is defined as the
plane passing through the center of the eyes parallel to the ground, even after the rotation is
applied to the animal‘s head and the screen. It is important to note that the mouse‘s eyes are
rotated slightly in the skull, so this definition of 0° altitude is not the center of the retina. Instead,
we approximated the horizontal meridian to be approximately 20° altitude in this configuration.
Thus 20° vertical (altitude) eccentricity should be considered the horizontal meridian in the
retinotopic maps presented in this study (Figure 1, 2 and S2).
The screen was positioned so that the perpendicular bisector was 28 centimeters from the
bottom of the screen, centered on the screen left to right (34 centimeters on each side), and 10 cm
from the eye. This positioning of the monitor, in conjunction with the spherical stimulus
correction described below, accurately simulated a hemispherical display around the mouse. This
results in a stimulus that maintains constant spatial frequency at all locations. Furthermore, a
distance of 10 cm between the eye and the stimulus is beyond the theoretical point of ‗infinite
focus‘ of the mouse eye (Remtulla and Hallett, 1985; Green et al., 1980; de la Cera et al., 2006),
leading to similar focus at all points on the screen.
For both intrinsic imaging and low magnification calcium imaging retinotopy
experiments, a periodic drifting bar stimulus was used (Kalatsky and Stryker, 2003). The bar
was 20° wide and subtended the whole visual hemifield along the vertical and horizontal axes

14

Marshel, Garrett, Nauhaus & Callaway

(153° or 147° respectively). The bar was drifted 10 times in each of the four cardinal directions.
A counter-phase checkerboard pattern was flashed on the bar, alternating between black and
white (25° squares with 166 ms period) to strongly drive neural activity (Movie S1 and S2).
Azimuth correction was used for the bar drifting along the horizontal axis and altitude correction
was used for the bar drifting along the vertical axis (see below), in order to define eccentricity
using standard spherical coordinates. By drifting the bar in both directions along a given axis it
was possible to subtract the delay in the intrinsic signal relative to neural activity (Kalatsky and
Stryker, 2003; see Data Analysis). The bar drifted at 8.5-9.5°/s for intrinsic imaging experiments
and at 12-14°/s for two-photon imaging experiments.
For cellular resolution calcium imaging experiments, sinusoidal drifting gratings were
used. For each population of neurons imaged (a single 40X imaging plane), we presented (with
rare exceptions) four sets of stimuli: a temporal frequency varying experiment (0.5, 1, 2, 4 and 8
Hz, 8 directions plus blank, ~0.04 cpd, 5 repeats pseudorandomized for each parameter
combination), a spatial frequency varying experiment (0.01, 0.02, 0.04, .08 and 0.16 cpd, 8
directions plus blank, ~1 Hz, 5 repeats pseudorandomized for each parameter combination), a 12
direction orientation tuning experiment (~1 Hz, ~0.04 cpd, 5 repeats pseudorandomized for each
parameter combination and a blank condition), and a drifting bar retinotopy experiment (same
stimulus as for the low magnification 16X retinotopy experiments). The retinotopic mapping
experiment was performed with the 40x objective at cellular resolution to obtain a precise
eccentricity value for each neuron in the field of view. This eccentricity value was used to
restrict analysis to neurons with receptive fields within 50 degrees of the center of space, and
ensure that the populations from each visual area represented similar regions of space (see Data
Analysis section). A gray screen (mean luminance of grating stimuli) was shown between trials
and during the prestimulus baseline period. Stimulus durations were 4 sec for the temporal
frequency experiment and 2 sec for the spatial frequency and 12 direction experiments (Note:
data are not presented for the 12 direction experiments). Population data from previous
experiments in each area and from published data from V1 (e.g., Niell and Stryker, 2008) were
used to determine the value for the parameters held constant in each experiment in an effort to
strongly stimulate as large a population as possible, and keep parameters consistent across visual
areas. An altitude correction was used to account for the spherical distortion of the flat monitor
for spatial frequency, temporal frequency and orientation experiments. The isoluminance lines

15

Marshel, Garrett, Nauhaus & Callaway

of this stimulus are analogous to the altitude lines of a globe. That is, they form parallel rings
that are evenly spaced in eccentricity. This correction held the spatial frequency and temporal
frequency constant throughout the wide visual field.
Spherical corrections were applied to all stimuli in order to account for the distortions
created by displaying stimuli to the animal on a flat monitor (Figure S1, Movie S1 and S2).
Without correction, the spatial frequency and temporal frequency of a drifting grating shrink
rapidly with eccentricity—a problem present in any study using a flat screen, but especially
pronounced without appropriate correction in our study, which used a very large screen. Drifting
bar and grating stimuli were generated through custom routines in Psychtoolbox and Matlab and
then transformed with spherical projection, as described below.

Spherical Stimulus Correction
Retinotopic coordinates are often defined in units of degrees of visual field, a spherical
parameter. However, monitors are flat, which means that spatial frequency (cyc/deg) and speed
(cyc/sec) become gradually reduced for larger eccentricities when they are kept constant in
cycles/centimeter. When the eccentricities are kept to reasonably low values (e.g. <30o), this
distortion is small. However, our experiments call for stimulation over a large enough region of
visual space that this distortion becomes quite substantial.

For example, a drifting bar that is

kept constant in its width (cm) and speed (cm/sec) will become dramatically smaller (degrees)
and slower (deg/sec) at the largest eccentricities of our stimulus. We thus defined our stimuli
such that the angular variables in spherical coordinates (altitude or azimuth) are the independent
variables. For example, our sine wave gratings were defined as a function of spherical variables,
and these values were then projected onto a flat surface.
In our 3-dimensional coordinate system, we defined the eye as the origin. For the reasons
described above, our desired visual stimuli are initially described as a function of altitude, θ, and
azimuth, ф: S(θ,ф). The spherical coordinate space is oriented such that the perpendicular
bisector from the eye to the monitor is the (0o,0o) axis of the altitude/azimuth coordinates,
altitude increases above the mouse, and azimuth increases anterior to the mouse. Next, we
convert these spherical coordinates to Cartesian coordinates so that they can be drawn on the
monitor. To do so, we orient the Cartesian space so that the perpendicular bisector between the

16

Marshel, Garrett, Nauhaus & Callaway

eye and the monitor is the x-axis. The y and z axes are defined as the horizontal and vertical
dimensions on the monitor, with the x-dimension a constant on the monitor surface (xo). We can
now define the stimulus as a function of the horizontal (y) and vertical (z) pixel locations:

Next, we define a drifting grating that is a function of altitude, θ , and constant in ф. We
start with S = cos(2πfsθ - tft), where ‗fs‘ is the spatial frequency (cycles/radian), ‗ft‘ is the
temporal frequency (radians/second), and ‗t‘ is time. We then apply the polar-to-Cartesian
transformation, which gives us

To change the ‗orientation‘ of the drifting grating, we rotate it counterclockwise around
the x-axis. This is done by applying a rotation of the y/z plane, which can be obtained by
redefining y in the above equation as
z*sin(-φ) + y*cos(-φ), and z as z*cos(-φ) –y*sin(-φ).

We have thus defined a drifting grating with contours along altitude lines that have been
oriented by ‗φ‘. The stimulus is drawn on the monitor using the y and z domains.

Data Analysis
Intrinsic optical imaging retinotopy data were analyzed as previously described (Kalatsky and
Stryker, 2003). Briefly, data were acquired in a continuous block during stimulus presentation of
a bar drifting in one direction periodically. The phase of response relative to the stimulus was
computed for each pixel by computing the phase of the Fourier component at the same frequency
as the stimulus. Contrasting this phase difference with the data from the bar drifting in the
opposite direction along the same axis made it possible to estimate the center point between
them, accounting for the hemodynamic delay, and thus determining the best estimate of the
position in space that the cortical location responded to. A comparable approach was used to
analyze Ca2+ imaging retinotopy experiments.

17

Marshel, Garrett, Nauhaus & Callaway
For population analyses of cellular responses to drifting gratings, data were preprocessed

in the following ways. Each experiment (e.g., temporal frequency varying experiment) typically
lasted approximately 30-45 minutes. To account for drifts in the image over time, we applied a
movement correction algorithm that aligned each trial of the experiment to the average image of
the first trial by determining the highest cross-correlation between the images. Then regions of
interest (ROIs) around each cell in the image were created using a semi-automated procedure,
separately for the OGB channel (neurons and glia) and the sulfarhodamine-101 channel (glia).
Candidate ROIs were determined by thresholding an image of the field of view that had first
been processed with a local Z-score to normalize the local statistics. Then, ROIs were carefully
edited manually for both channels. Glia cells were removed from the analysis of the OGB
channel by removing any ROIs in the OGB channel that overlapped with ROIs marked in the
glia channel. The remaining ROIs in the OGB channel were neurons. The pixels were averaged
within each of these ROIs for each time point (each single image) to reflect the raw time course
of a given neuron.
In order to link neuron identities across experiments (e.g., to perform spatial and temporal
frequency cell-by-cell correlations), we found the relative position between the ROI maps for
each experiment that maximized the cross-correlation. Then we determined the cell ROIs which
overlapped across the ROI maps for each experiment by at least 3 pixels (the great majority of
neurons were overlapping) and created a new ROI map with unique identifiers of each common
neuron. Inverse transformations were applied to each ROI map so that each map realigned with
each original experiment. The end result was a common ROI map that identified neurons across
multiple experiments within the same field of view that accounted for any drifts in the imaging
field of view over the course of the imaging session.
The baseline calcium fluorescence signal was averaged within each cell ROI for each
trial during a prestimulus period during which a gray screen was shown (1 sec). Then, the entire
time course was converted from absolute fluorescence values to the percent change relative to
baseline by computing the following: ∆F/F = (FI-F)/F, where FI is the instantaneous
fluorescence signal and F is the baseline fluorescence. The ∆F/F response for each cell was
averaged during a two-second window following stimulus onset for each trial, and the mean and
standard deviation across trials for each stimulus and blank condition were computed for each
neuron. We applied several criteria to include neurons in further population analyses. Neurons

18

Marshel, Garrett, Nauhaus & Callaway

were deemed visually responsive if they gave a mean response above 6% ∆F/F to any of the
stimuli. A response reliability metric (δ) was computed for each neuron as follows:

where µmax and σmax are the mean and standard deviations of the response to the preferred
stimulus respectively, and µblank and σblank are the mean and standard deviations of the response
to the blank stimulus respectively. Neurons were deemed reliable for δ > 1. Finally, neuron
eccentricity mapped with the retinotopy stimulus was used to restrict our population analyses to
eccentricity-matched neurons within 50° of the center of space (see Table S1). The numbers of
neurons which met all of these criteria were used as the denominator in all subsequent analyses
of fraction of neurons exhibiting a particular score on a given parameter.

Tuning Metrics
Temporal and spatial frequency tuning curves were taken at the optimal orientation and direction
for each neuron, using the average ∆F/F response for each condition across trials. These tuning
curves were fit with a Difference of Gaussians function (Sceniak et al., 2002). A log2 transform
was performed on the x-axis of the curves, converting it to octaves. The preferred frequency was
taken at the peak (maximum) location of this curve. For bandwidth and low and high cutoff
measurements, each cell was characterized as either bandpass, highpass or lowpass for temporal
and spatial frequency based on whether its minimum and/or maximum frequency response
passed below the half max for the tuning curve. The high cutoff was computed for bandpass and
lowpass cells as the highest frequency which drove a half-max response. Low cutoff was
computed for bandpass and highpass cells as the lowest frequency which drove a half-max
response. Bandwidth was measured for bandpass cells as the difference between high cutoff and
low cutoff.
The orientation and direction tuning curves were taken at the optimal spatial frequency
for each neuron, using the average ∆F/F response for each condition across trials. The orientation
selectivity index (OSI) was computed as follows:

19

Marshel, Garrett, Nauhaus & Callaway

where µmax is the mean response to the preferred orientation and µorth is the mean response to the
orthogonal orientation (average of both directions). The direction selectivity index was computed
as follows:

where µmax is the mean response to the preferred direction and µopp is the mean response to the
opposite direction. The half-width at half-maximum (HWHM) was computed for each neuron‘s
orientation and direction tuning curves but our results suggested that we did not adequately
sample the direction domain to make comparisons based on these measurements (i.e., neurons
may have had sharper tuning widths than our sampling of the direction domain could detect).

Statistics
We started with the most basic question: are mouse cortical visual areas distinguishable based on
population tuning metrics? We asked this question statistically using a multivariate analysis of
variance (MANOVA) on the four values we computed for every neuron in our sample from each
area: preferred temporal frequency, preferred spatial frequency, orientation selectivity index and
direction selectivity index. We also computed bandwidth and high and low cutoff metrics for
each population, however not every neuron received a value for all of these metrics and thus we
excluded these metrics from the multivariate analysis. We followed up this analysis with
individual univariate analyses to confirm whether there was a main effect of area on each of our
dependent variables (both one-way ANOVA and one-way Kruskal-Wallis tests). Finally, for
each significant one-way test, we performed post-hoc pairwise comparisons to determine which
areas were different from each other in terms of each metric, correcting the p value for multiple
comparisons using the Tukey-Kramer Honestly Significant Difference (HSD). Pearson
correlation coefficients and statistical significance compared against no correlation were
computed using Matlab routines, and the p value was corrected for multiple comparisons using
the Bonferroni method (Figure S6).

20

Marshel, Garrett, Nauhaus & Callaway

III. Supplemental References
Pologruto, T.A., Sabatini, B.L., and Svoboda, K. (2003). ScanImage: flexible software for
operating laser scanning microscopes. Biomedical engineering online 2, 13.
Remtulla, S., and Hallett, P.E. (1985). A schematic eye for the mouse, and comparisons with the
rat. Vision Res 25, 21-31.
Green, D.G., Powers, M.K., and Banks, M.S. (1980). Depth of focus, eye size and visual acuity.
Vision Res 20, 827-835.
de la Cera, E.G., Rodriguez, G., Llorente, L., Schaeffel, F., and Marcos, S. (2006). Optical
aberrations in the mouse eye. Vision Res 46, 2546-2553.

